Update user-consent.md with with the information related to the CAMARA APIs access flows (#54)
camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement: documentation/user-consent.md

### Authentication mechanism/s

>[TO BE EDITED/COMPLETED] - Authentication mechanism/s to be considered... E.g.: IP/Network authentication, SMS OTP, User/password, Push to operator application​...

### Consent capture and storage

>[TO BE EDITED/COMPLETED] - Consent capture by operator and storage in operator (consent master).

### Authorization flows / grant types

#### Authorization code flow (Frontend flow)

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
autonumber
title Consume a CAMARA API - Authorization Code Grant (FrontEnd)
participant FE as Device App
participant BE as Invoker (App Backend/Aggregator)
box Operator

>   participant ExpO as OGW Platform<br>@Operator

Reviewer: I suggest to remove  references to OGW in and rename _OGW Platform_ to _API Gateway Platform_ or _CAMARA API Gateway Platform_.  Diagrams in Authentication and Authorization Concept for Service APIs[](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-AuthN-AuthZ-Concept.md) use _Gateway_ node.
```suggestion
  participant ExpO as API Gateway<br> Platform @Operator
```

Author: +1 I missed to remove OGW references in the doc. Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5. 

Finally, I used the term "API Exposure Platform" because that's what was agreed upon in the past. And because, in general, the exposure platform could be not only the API GW, but also the Auth Server, etc. I have also included the definition of the term in the Glossary section. For clarity.

  participant Consent as Consent Master<br>@Operator
end

Note over FE,BE: Use Feature needing<br>Operator Capability  
BE->>FE: Auth Needed - redirect <br>/authorize?response_type=code&client_id=coolApp<br>&purpose=purpose&redirect_uri=invoker_callback...
FE->>+FE: Browser /<br> Embedded Browser

> alt Standard OIDC Auth Code Flow between Invoker and OGW Platform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alt Standard OIDC Auth Code Flow between Invoker and API Gateway Platform
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

  FE-->>ExpO: GET /authorize?response_type=code&client_id=coolApp&purpose=purpose&redirect_uri=invoker_callback...

>   Note over ExpO: OGW Platform Applies<br>Network Based Authentication (amr=nba/mnba)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Note over ExpO: API Gateway Platform Applies<br>Network Based Authentication (amr=nba/mnba)
```
Is _Network Based Authentication (amr=nba/mnba)_ defined in OIDC specs?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

  ExpO->>ExpO: Check legal basis of the purpose<br> e.g.: contract, legitimate_interest, consent, etc 
  opt If User Consent is required for the legal basis of the purpose  
    ExpO->>Consent: Check if Consent is granted    
  end  
  alt If Consent is Granted or Consent not needed for legal basis   
    ExpO-->>FE: 302<br>Location: invoker_callback?code=Operatorcode
  else If Consent is NOT granted - Consent Capture within AuthCode Flow  
    Note over FE,ExpO: Consent capture  
    alt when user grants consent / otherwise flow fails  
      ExpO-->>FE: 302<br>Location: invoker_callback?code=Operatorcode
    end  
  end  
  FE-->>-BE: GET invoker_callback?code=OperatorCode
  BE->>ExpO: POST /token<br> code=OperatorCode
  ExpO->>BE: 200 OK <br> {OperatorAccessToken}
end

BE->>ExpO: Access Operator CAMARA API <br> Authorization: Bearer {OperatorAccessToken}        
ExpO->>ExpO: Decrypt OperatorAccessToken,<br>grants Access,<br>progresses request to API Backend,<br>gets API response  
ExpO->>BE: CAMARA API Response
Note over BE,FE: Response
```

<br>

**Flow description**:

> First, the API invoker (which could potentially be the application BE, an aggregator, etc.) instructs the application frontend in the device to initiate the OIDC authorization code flow with the operator. 

Reviewer: BE abbreviation could be not clear:
```suggestion
First, the API invoker (which could potentially be the application Backend, an aggregator, etc.) instructs the application frontend in the device to initiate the OIDC authorization code flow with the operator. 
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

> As per the standard authorization code flow, the device application is redirected to the operator authorization endpoint in OGW platform (Steps 1-2), providing a redirect_uri (invoker_callback) pointing to the invoker backend (where the auth code will eventually be sent), as well as the purpose for accessing the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As per the standard authorization code flow, the device application is redirected to the operator authorization endpoint in API Gateway Platform (Steps 1-2), providing a redirect_uri (invoker_callback) pointing to the invoker backend (where the auth code will eventually be sent), as well as the purpose for accessing the data.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

> The OGW platform receives the request from the device application (Step 3) and does the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API Gateway Platform receives the request from the device application (Step 3) and does the following:
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

- Use network based authentication mechanism to obtain the user identifier, i.e.: MSISDN. Set the OAuth sub to the unique user ID in the operator (Step 4).

- Check if user consent is required, which depends on the legal basis associated with the purpose ("legitimate interest", "contract", "consent", etc). If necessary, it will check in the operator's consent master whether user consent has already been given for this identifier and for the requested purpose(s) (Steps 5-6).

Then, two alternatives may occur:

> **Scenario 1**: User consent is not required or consent is already given (Step 7). The OGW platform will continue the authorization code flow by redirecting to the API invoker redirect_uri (invoker_callback) and including the authorization code (OperatorCode).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Scenario 1**: User consent is not required or consent is already given (Step 7). The API Gateway Platform will continue the authorization code flow by redirecting to the API invoker redirect_uri (invoker_callback) and including the authorization code (OperatorCode).
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

**Scenario 2**: Consent is required and not yet provided by user (Step 8)

- The operator performs the consent capture. Since the authorization code grant involves the frontend, the consent can be captured directly from the user.
- Once the user has given consent, the authorization code flow continues by redirecting to the API invoker redirect_uri (invoker_callback) and including the authorization code (OperatorCode).

> Once the API invoker receives the redirect with the authorization code (OperatorCode - Step 9), it will retrieve the access token from the OGW operator platform (OperatorAccessToken) (Steps 10-11). The OperatorAccessToken issued is encrypted so that no relevant information is exposed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the API invoker receives the redirect with the authorization code (OperatorCode - Step 9), it will retrieve the access token from the Operator's API Gateway Platform (OperatorAccessToken) (Steps 10-11). The OperatorAccessToken issued is encrypted so that no relevant information is exposed.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

Now the API invoker has a valid access token that can be used to invoke the CAMARA API offered by the operator (Step 12).

> The operator OGW platform will validate OperatorAccessToken, grant the access to the API based on the scopes bound to the access token, progress request to the corresponding API backend and retrieve the API response (Step 13).

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

    - 3-legged (obtained access_token is associated to corresponding user identifier)
  - Consent management:
    - Check if user consent is required by lawful basis associated with the declared purpose. 
      - If necessary, it will be checked **in the operator's consent master** whether user consent has already been given to the application for the user identifier and declared purpose.
    - If NOT granted, **the operator performs the consent capture**. Since the authorization code grant involves the interaction with application front-end, consent can be captured directly from the user through the application browser.
  - Covered scenarios:
    - On-net (with mobile connection) & application front-end (with embedded browser)
    - Off-net scenarios using refresh_token, as long as there was a connection when the first access_token was requested.

>[TO BE EDITED/COMPLETED] - [Technical disscussion on ruleset to be applied](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/52) are ongoing.

#### CIBA flow (Backend flow)

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
autonumber

> title Consume a Hyperscaler Enhanced Service API - CIBA flow

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

participant User as End User<br>@Authentication Device
participant FE as Device App<br> (Consumption Device)
participant BE as Invoker (App Backend/Aggregator)  
box Operator

>   participant ExpO as OGW Platform<br>@Operator  

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

  opt If User Consent is required for the legal basis of the purpose  
    ExpO->>Consent: Check if Consent is granted
  end
  alt If Consent is Granted or Consent not needed for legal basis   
    ExpO->>BE: HTTP 200 OK {"auth_req_id": "{OperatorAuthReqId}"  
  else If Consent is needed and is NOT granted - Out Of Band Consent Capture (Push/SMS/other)
    note over ExpO,User: User Interaction <br> out-of-band capture consent mechanism chosen by the Operator
    ExpO->>BE: HTTP 200 OK {"auth_req_id": "{OperatorAuthReqId}"
  end
  loop Invoker polls until consent is granted or until expires. If granted in advance, token returned in first poll
    BE->>+ExpO: POST /token <br>Credentials}<br>auth_req_id={OperatorAuthReqId}    
    ExpO->>-BE: HTTP 200 OK <br>{"access_token": "{OperatorAccessToken}"} 
  end  
end
BE->>ExpO: Access Operator CAMARA API <br> Authorization: Bearer {OperatorAccessToken}    
ExpO->>ExpO: Decrypt OperatorAccessToken,<br>grants Access,<br>progresses request to API Backend,<br>gets API response  
ExpO->>BE: CAMARA API Response
Note over BE,FE: Response
```

<br>

**Flow description**:

> First, the API invoker (which could potentially be the application BE, an aggregator, etc.) requests a 3-legged access token to the operator OGW platform. The process follows the OpenID Connect [Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication (CIBA)](https://openid.net/specs/openid-client-initiated-backchannel-authentication-core-1_0.html) flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the API invoker (which could potentially be the Application Backend, an Aggregator, etc.) requests a 3-legged access token to the operator API Gateway Platform. The process follows the OpenID Connect [Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication (CIBA)](https://openid.net/specs/openid-client-initiated-backchannel-authentication-core-1_0.html) flow.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

The API invoker has to provide in the authorization request (/bc_authorize) a login_hint with a valid user identifier together with the credentials and indicate the purpose for accessing the data (Step 1): 

- One option for the identifier is the public IP and (optionally – when applicable) port of the application. Other options could be the MSISDN or other identifiers. NOTE: In IoT scenarios or, in general, in those cases where the consumption device is different than the authorization device, the IP and port is the one of the consumption device for which the network capabilities will be requested/applied.
- The login_hint is a hint regarding the user for whom authentication is being requested. It has the format `<type>:<identifier>`, for instance, "ipport:" for IP addresses or "tel:+" for phone numbers. A login_hint example for MSISDN "+346xxxyyyzzz" looks like:

    ```
    POST /bc-authorize HTTP/1.1
    Authorization: Basic {Credentials}
    Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

    login_hint=tel%3A%2B346xxyyyzzz&
    … 
    ```
- Purpose under which the personal data associated to API consumption will be processed.

> The operator OGW platform will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operator API Gateway Platform will:
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

- Validate user identifier, map it to a telco identifier if applicable, e.g.: map IP to MSISDN. Set the OAuth sub to the unique user id in the operator (Step 2).

- Check if a user consent is needed, which depends on the legal basis associated to the purpose (“legitimate interest”, “contract”, “consent”, etc). If needed, it will check in operator consent master if user consent was already given for that identifier and for the requested purpose(s) (Steps 3-4).

Then, two alternatives may occur.

> **Scenario 1**: User consent is not needed or consent is already granted (Step 5). OGW platform will directly return a 200 OK response with the CIBA auth request identifier (auth_req_id=OperatorAuthReqId) to the API invoker. This is a unique identifier to identify the authentication request made by the invoker.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

**Scenario 2**: Consent is needed and is not granted by the user yet (Step 6)

- A mechanism is triggered to capture user consent in the operator:
  
  - The operator triggers an out-of-band consent capture mechanism to interact with the user. **Operators can choose the consent capture mechanism that best suits their capabilities, preferences and needs**. This mechanism can be a push notification, an SMS, etc.

>   - In parallel, the OGW platform operator returns a 200 OK response with the CIBA auth request identifier (auth_req_id=OperatorAuthReqId) to the API invoker to indicate that the authentication request has been accepted and is going to be processed (Step 6).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - In parallel, the Operator's API Gateway Platform returns a 200 OK response with the CIBA auth request identifier (auth_req_id=OperatorAuthReqId) to the API invoker to indicate that the authentication request has been accepted and is going to be processed (Step 6).
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

<br>

Then, the API invoker polls the token endpoint by making an "HTTP POST" request by sending the grant_type (`urn:openid:params:grant-type:ciba`) and auth_req_id (OperatorAuthReqId) parameters (Step 7).
- The API invoker will receive the following error code if the authorization is still pending to be accepted or rejected by the user.
    
    ```
    HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
    Content-Type: application/json
    
    {
        "error": "authorization_pending",
    }
    ```
- When this response is received, the API invoker must wait the seconds of the `interval` value received in the CIBA authorization endpoint and then repeat the request until a final response is received.

> - Once the user has granted consent, the OGW platform operator will provide the access token (OperatorAccessToken) to the API invoker (Step 8). The OperatorAccessToken issued will be encrypted so no relevant information is disclosed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once the user has granted consent, the Operator's API Gateway Platform will provide the access token (OperatorAccessToken) to the API Invoker (Step 8). The OperatorAccessToken issued will be encrypted so no relevant information is disclosed.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c7f9715fa8c597e4c9f94e8f0bbf3aecc501ead5.

- The operator performs the consent capture. Since the authorization code grant involves the frontend, the consent can be captured directly from the user.
- Once the user has given consent, the authorization code flow continues by redirecting to the API invoker redirect_uri (invoker_callback) and including the authorization code (OperatorCode).

Once the API invoker receives the redirect with the authorization code (OperatorCode - Step 9), it will retrieve the access token from the operator's API exposure platform (OperatorAccessToken) (Steps 10-11). The OperatorAccessToken issued is encrypted so that no relevant information is exposed.

Now the API invoker has a valid access token that can be used to invoke the CAMARA API offered by the operator (Step 12).

The operator's API exposure platform will validate OperatorAccessToken, grant the access to the API based on the scopes bound to the access token, progress request to the corresponding API backend and retrieve the API response (Step 13).

Finally, the operator will provide API response to the API invoker (Step 14).

**Technical ruleset for the Frontend flow**

> On-net scenarios where the mobile connection of the device needs to be authenticated (e.g. This flow is for example the one specified for the [CAMARA Number Verification API](https://github.com/camaraproject/NumberVerification/blob/main/documentation/API_documentation/CAMARA/uml_v0.3.jpg) due to the nature of its functionality where a given MSISDN needs to be compared to the MSISDN associated with the mobile connection of the user device). The device application (front-end) must be able to handle browser redirects.

Reviewer 2: We had a similar ruleset in mind but phrased slightly differently:
1. If all API usecases point to the need of On-net scneario and where the consumption device and authentication device are the same, the front end flow must be used. eg. NumberVerification
2. If some usecase/s for an API point to off-net scenarios and where consumption and authenticaiton devices could be different, the backend flow must be used.

Author: Hopefully fixed in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/54/commits/c89cbf94fd92b39514e0974ab85638c3034023e5

  ExpO->>ExpO: Check legal basis of the purpose<br> e.g.: contract, legitimate_interest, consent, etc 
  opt If User Consent is required for the legal basis of the purpose  
    ExpO->>Consent: Check if Consent is granted    
  end  
  alt If Consent is Granted or Consent not needed for legal basis   
    ExpO-->>FE: 302<br>Location: invoker_callback?code=Operatorcode
  else If Consent is NOT granted - Consent Capture within AuthCode Flow  
    Note over FE,ExpO: Consent capture  
    alt when user grants consent / otherwise flow fails  
      ExpO-->>FE: 302<br>Location: invoker_callback?code=Operatorcode
    end  
  end  
  FE-->>-BE: GET invoker_callback?code=OperatorCode
  BE->>ExpO: POST /token<br> code=OperatorCode
  ExpO->>BE: 200 OK <br> {OperatorAccessToken}
end

BE->>ExpO: Access Operator CAMARA API <br> Authorization: Bearer {OperatorAccessToken}        
ExpO->>ExpO: Decrypt OperatorAccessToken,<br>grants Access,<br>progresses request to API Backend,<br>gets API response  
ExpO->>BE: CAMARA API Response
Note over BE,FE: Response
```

<br>

**Flow description**:

> First, the API invoker (which could potentially be the application backend, an aggregator, etc.) instructs the application frontend in the device to initiate the OIDC authorization code flow with the operator. The authorization request includes the client_id of the final application requesting access to the data and the application redirect_uri (invoker_callback) where the authorization code will be sent.

Author: @AxelNennker Telefónica supports PKCE with S256, but we believe that the call to /token is sufficiently protected by the use of client_secret and redirect_uri, in addition to other additional measures such as the code being single use only.

Adding new implementation requirements for clients can be counterproductive, we would need to evaluate whether the gain in security is relevant and compensates for the added complexity.

In any case, it's better to keep this as a separate issue if needed, and not make the merging of this PR dependent on this specific PKCE issue.

> First, the API invoker (which could potentially be the application backend, an aggregator, etc.) instructs the application frontend in the device to initiate the OIDC authorization code flow with the operator. The authorization request includes the client_id of the final application requesting access to the data and the application redirect_uri (invoker_callback) where the authorization code will be sent.

Reviewer 3: The new oauth2 current security best practices make PKCE a MUST for authorization servers. Also for Authorization Code grant and recommended for other flows. Flows that have "nonce" are protected by that but PKCE is the better protection, I think.

> First, the API invoker (which could potentially be the application backend, an aggregator, etc.) instructs the application frontend in the device to initiate the OIDC authorization code flow with the operator. The authorization request includes the client_id of the final application requesting access to the data and the application redirect_uri (invoker_callback) where the authorization code will be sent.

Author: Please @AxelNennker, open a separate issue to discuss this topic if you feel it needs further discussion. No problem.
